Building a Video Streaming App with SvelteKit and Directus (#292)
directus-labs/guest-authoring: video-streaming-app-with-directus-and-sveltekit/index.md

---
title: 'Build a Video streaming app with Directus and Sveltekit #199'
description: 'Learn how to integrate Directus with SvelteKit. You will store, and retrieve video metadata in Directus CMS and use them to build a video streaming application.'
author:
  name: 'Clara Ekekenta'
  avatar_file_name: './clara-ekekenta.avif'
---

> ## Introduction
> SvelteKit is a framework built on top of the Svelte framework, designed to facilitate building fast and efficient web applications. In this tutorial, you will learn how to build an application using Directus as a Headless CMS. You will store, and retrieve video metadata in Directus CMS and use them to build a video streaming application.
> 
> ## Before You Start
> You will need:
> 
> - [Node.js v20.11.1](https://nodejs.org/) or later.
> - A code editor on your computer.
> - A Directus project - follow our [quickstart guide](https://docs.directus.io/getting-started/quickstart) if you don't already have one.
> - Some knowledge of React and Sveltekit.
> 
> You can find the code for this tutorial on my [GitHub repository](https://github.com/Claradev32/directus_sveltekit).
> 
> 
> ## Setting up a new project.
> 
> Setting up a new Sveltekit project and install the required dependencies including the Directus SDK:
> 
> ```
> npm create svelte@latest video-streaming-app #
> cd video-streaming-app
> npm install
> npm install @directus/sdk
> ```
> 
> ## Create a Directus Helper
> In your `src/libs` folder, create a new `directus.ts` file to create a Directus SDK instance helper function:
> 
> ```
> import { createDirectus, rest } from "@directus/sdk";
> 
> export const DIRECTUS_API_URL = import.meta.env.VITE_DIRECTUS_URL;
> 
> function getDirectusClient() {
>   const directus = createDirectus(DIRECTUS_API_URL).with(rest());
>   return directus;
> }
> export default getDirectusClient;
> ```
> 
> Create a `.env` file in the root folder of your project and add your Directus API URL:
> 
> ```
> VITE_DIRECTUS_URL='https://directus.example.com';
> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
In this tutorial, you will learn how to build an application using Directus as a backend. You will store and retrieve video metadata in Directus CMS and use them to build a video streaming application that tracks views.

## Before You Start

You will need:

- [Node.js v20.11.1](https://nodejs.org/) or later.
- A code editor on your computer.
- A Directus project - follow our [quickstart guide](https://docs.directus.io/getting-started/quickstart) if you don't already have one.
- Some knowledge of SvelteKit.

You can find the code for this tutorial on my [GitHub repository](https://github.com/Claradev32/directus_sveltekit).

## Creating a Svelte Project

Setting up a new Sveltekit project and install the required dependencies including the Directus SDK:

```
npm create svelte@latest video-streaming-app #
cd video-streaming-app
npm install
npm install @directus/sdk svelte-video-player
```

In your `src/libs` folder, create a new `directus.ts` file to create a Directus SDK instance helper function:

```js
import { createDirectus, rest } from "@directus/sdk";
export const DIRECTUS_API_URL = import.meta.env.VITE_DIRECTUS_URL;
function getDirectusClient() {
  const directus = createDirectus(DIRECTUS_API_URL).with(rest());
  return directus;
};
export default getDirectusClient;
```

Create a `.env` file in the root folder of your project and add your Directus API URL:

```
VITE_DIRECTUS_URL='https://directus.example.com';
```
````

> ## Creating Collections
> Navigate to Settings -> Data Model in your Directus Data Model, and create a new collection named `videos`. Create the following fields for this collection:
> 
> - `id` (Primary Key Field, Type: Manually entered string)
> - `title` (Type: String, Interface: Input)
> - `description` (Type: String, Interface: Input)
> - `thumbnail` (Type: Image Field)
> - `video_file` (Type: File Field)
> - `tags`  (Type: Tags Field)
> - `views` (Type: String, Interface: Input)
> - `upload_date` (Type: Datetime Field)
> 
> Go to Settings -> Access Control -> Public and give the Public role a read access for the `videos` collection to allow unauthenticated read access collection from your frontend. Also you need to grant the Public role read access to the `directus_files` collection in the System Collections to access the images and videos saved in your `videos` collection.
> 
> Add 3 items in the `videos` collection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Creating a Directus Collection

Create a new `videos` collection with the following fields:

- `id` (Primary Key Field, Type: Manually entered string)
- `title` (Type: String, Interface: Input)
- `description` (Type: String, Interface: Input)
- `thumbnail` (Type: Image Field)
- `video_file` (Type: File Field)
- `tags`  (Type: Tags Field)
- `views` (Type: String, Interface: Input)
- `upload_date` (Type: Datetime Field)

Give the Public role read access on the `videos` and `directus_files` collections.

Create 3 videos in the collection to test with.
```

## Creating Video Listing Page
In your SvelteKit application, create a `types.ts` file in the `src/lib` folder to define the structure of your video data and ensure type safety throughout your application.

```ts
export interface Video {
  id: string;
  title: string;
  description: string;
  video_file:  { id: string };
  thumbnail: { id: string };
  tags: string[];
  duration: number;
  views: number;

>   upload_date: string;
> }
> ```
> 
> Create a new `components` folder inside the `src/libs` folder. Within this new folder, create two component files: `VideoCard.svelte` and `VideoGrid.svelte`. Add the following code snippet to the `VideoCard.svelte` file:
> 
> ```svelte
> <script lang="ts">
>   import type { Video } from "$lib/types";
>   export let video: Video;
> </script>
> 
> <a href="/video/{video.id}" class="video-card">
>   <img
>     src={`${import.meta.env.VITE_DIRECTUS_URL}/assets/${video.thumbnail.id}`}
>     alt={video.title}
>   />
>   <h3>{video.title}</h3>
>   <p>
>     {video.views} views • {new Date(video.upload_date).toLocaleDateString()}
>   </p>
> </a>
> 
> <style>
>   .video-card {
>     display: block;
>     text-decoration: none;
>     color: inherit;
>   }
>   img {
>     width: 100%;
>     height: auto;
>   }
> </style>
> ```
> Then add the following code to the `VideoGrid.svelte` file:
> 
> ```svelte
> <script lang="ts">
>   import type { Video } from "$lib/types";
>   import VideoCard from "./VideoCard.svelte";
> 
>   export let videos: Video[];
> </script>
> 
> <div class="video-grid">
>   {#each videos as video}
>     <VideoCard {video} />
>   {/each}
> </div>
> 
> <style>
>   .video-grid {
>     display: grid;
>     grid-template-columns: repeat(auto-fill, minmax(250px, 1fr));
>     gap: 1rem;
>   }
> </style>
> ```
> Those two files are reusable components created to render your video data and organize the videos in a grid layout.

Reviewer: ````suggestion
## Creating the Video Listing Page

In your SvelteKit application, create a `types.ts` file in the `src/lib` folder to define the structure of your video data and ensure type safety throughout your application.

```ts
export interface Video {
  id: string;
  title: string;
  description: string;
  video_file:  { id: string };
  thumbnail: { id: string };
  tags: string[];
  duration: number;
  views: number;
  upload_date: string;
}
```

Create a new `components` folder inside the `src/libs` folder. Within this new folder, create two component files: `VideoCard.svelte` and `VideoGrid.svelte`. Add the following code snippet to the `VideoCard.svelte` file:

```svelte
<script lang="ts">
  import type { Video } from "$lib/types";
  export let video: Video;
</script>

<a href="/video/{video.id}" class="video-card">
  <img
    src={`${import.meta.env.VITE_DIRECTUS_URL}/assets/${video.thumbnail.id}`}
    alt={video.title}
  />
  <h3>{video.title}</h3>
  <p>
    {video.views} views • {new Date(video.upload_date).toLocaleDateString()}
  </p>
</a>

<style>
  .video-card { display: block; text-decoration: none; color: inherit; }
  img { width: 100%; height: auto; }
</style>
```
Then add the following code to the `VideoGrid.svelte` file:

```svelte
<script lang="ts">
  import type { Video } from "$lib/types";
  import VideoCard from "./VideoCard.svelte";
  export let videos: Video[];
</script>

<div class="video-grid">
  {#each videos as video}
    <VideoCard {video} />
  {/each}
</div>

<style>
  .video-grid { display: grid; grid-template-columns: repeat(auto-fill, minmax(250px, 1fr)); gap: 1rem; }
</style>
```

Those two files are reusable components created to render your video data and organize the videos in a grid layout.
````

> ## Fetching video data
> In your `src/libs folder`, create a new folder named services. Inside this folder, create a file named `index.ts`. Add the following code to this file to use the Directus helper function to fetch all the videos from your Directus `videos` collection:
> 
> ```ts
> import getDirectusClient from "$lib/directus";
> import { readItems } from "@directus/sdk";
> import type { Video } from "$lib/types";
> 
> export async function getVideos(params = {}): Promise<Video[]> {
>   const directus = getDirectusClient();
>   const response = await directus.request(readItems("videos", params));
>   return response as Video[];
> }
> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
## Fetching Videos

In your `src/libs folder`, create a new folder named `services`. Inside this folder, create a file named `index.ts`. Add the following code to this file to use the Directus helper function to fetch all the videos from your Directus `videos` collection:

```ts
import getDirectusClient from "$lib/directus";
import { readItems } from "@directus/sdk";
import type { Video } from "$lib/types";

export async function getVideos(params = {}): Promise<Video[]> {
  const directus = getDirectusClient();
  const response = await directus.request(readItems("videos", params));
  return response as Video[];
}
```
````

> ## Displaying thumbnails and titles
> Update the your `routes/+page.svelte` file to use the `getVideos` function to fetch video data and display it using the `VideoGrid` component. This will display the thumbnails, titles, views and dates of the videos.
> ```svelte
> +
> <script lang="ts">
>   import { onMount } from "svelte";
>   import { getVideos } from "$lib/services/index";
>   import VideoGrid from "$lib/components/VideoGrid.svelte";
>   import type { Video } from "$lib/types";
> 
>   let videos: Video[] = [];
> 
>   onMount(async () => {
>     try {
>       videos = await getVideos({
>         sort: ["-upload_date"],
>         limit: 20,
>         fields: ["*", "thumbnail.*", "video_file.*"],
>       });
>     } catch (error) {
>       console.error("Error fetching videos:", error);
>     }
>   });
> </script>
> 
> <h1>Stream your favourite vidoes</h1>
> 
> 
> {#if videos.length > 0}
>   <VideoGrid {videos} />
> {:else}
>   <p>Loading videos...</p>
> {/if}
> ```
> Directus stores file metadata in the `directus_files` collection. When using file fields in other collections, Directus creates a one-to-many relationship. To include file data when fetching items, you use dot notation in the fields parameter, like `thumbnail.*` and `video_file.*`. This tells Directus to populate the file information from the `directus_files` collection.
> 
> ![Video Listing](<Screenshot 2024-07-04 at 11.53.25.png>)

Reviewer: ````suggestion
## Displaying Thumbnails and Titles

Update the your `routes/+page.svelte` file to use the `getVideos` function to fetch video data and display it using the `VideoGrid` component. This will display the thumbnails, titles, views and dates of the videos.

```svelte
<script lang="ts">
  import { onMount } from "svelte";
  import { getVideos } from "$lib/services/index";
  import VideoGrid from "$lib/components/VideoGrid.svelte";
  import type { Video } from "$lib/types";

  let videos: Video[] = [];

  onMount(async () => {
    try {
      videos = await getVideos({
        sort: ["-upload_date"],
        limit: 20,
        fields: ["*", "thumbnail.*", "video_file.*"],
      });
    } catch (error) {
      console.error("Error fetching videos:", error);
    }
  });
</script>

<h1>Stream your favorite videos</h1>

{#if videos.length > 0}
  <VideoGrid {videos} />
{:else}
  <p>Loading videos...</p>
{/if}
```

Directus stores file metadata in the `directus_files` collection, and when using file fields in other collections, Directus creates a one-to-many relationship. To include file data when fetching items, you use dot notation in the fields parameter, like `thumbnail.*` and `video_file.*`. This tells Directus to populate the file information from the `directus_files` collection.

![Video Listing](<Screenshot 2024-07-04 at 11.53.25.png>)
````

Please update this to use the correct fields syntax. what you've done works but is not recommended. Nested items should be an object - refer to our docs for more.

Author: Done

## Video Player Page
Install the Svelte video player component to play the videos with the command.

```shell
npm install svelte-video-player
```

Update your `services/index.ts` file to add new functions that will fetch a video by its ID and update the `videos` collection to increment the video's views field.
```ts
+
// your other imports
import { readItems, readItem, updateItem } from "@directus/sdk";

export async function getVideo(id: string): Promise<Video> {
  const directus = getDirectusClient();
  const response = await directus.request(
    readItem("videos", id, {
      fields: ["*", "thumbnail.*", "video_file.*"],
    })
  );
  return response as Video;
}

export async function incrementViews(id: string) {
  const directus = getDirectusClient();
  const video = await directus.request(readItem("videos", id));
  await directus.request(
    updateItem("videos", id, { views: parseInt(video.views || 0) + 1 })
  );
}
```

Create a nested route in your **routes** folder in the format `video/[id]/+page.svelte` to create a page to play selected videos. Update this file with the following code:

> 
> ```svelte
> <script lang="ts">
>   import { page } from "$app/stores";
>   import { getVideo, incrementViews } from "$lib/services";
>   import VideoPlayer from "svelte-video-player";
>   import type { Video } from "$lib/types";
> 
>   let video: Video | null = null;
> 
>   $: id = $page.params.id;
>   $: if (id) {
>     getVideo(id)
>       .then((v: Video) => {
>         video = v;
>         incrementViews(id);
>       })
>       .catch((error) => {
>         console.error("Error fetching video:", error);
>       });
>   }
> </script>
> 
> {#if video}
>   <h1>{video.title}</h1>
>   <p>
>     {video.views} views • {new Date(video.upload_date).toLocaleDateString()}
>   </p>
>   <VideoPlayer
>     poster={`${import.meta.env.VITE_DIRECTUS_URL}/assets/${video.thumbnail.id}`}
>     source={`${import.meta.env.VITE_DIRECTUS_URL}/assets/${video.video_file.id}`}
>   />
>   <h2>Description</h2>
>   <p>{video.description}</p>
>   <h2>Tags</h2>
>   <div class="tags">
>     {#each video.tags as tag}
>       <span class="tag">{tag}</span>
>     {/each}
>   </div>
> {:else}
>   <p>Loading...</p>
> {/if}
> 
> <style>
>   .tags {
>     display: flex;
>     flex-wrap: wrap;
>     gap: 0.5rem;
>   }
>   .tag {
>     background-color: #eee;
>     padding: 0.25rem 0.5rem;
>     border-radius: 0.25rem;
>   }
> </style>
> ```
> Now click on any of the videos to stream it. 
> 
> ![Video Player](<Screenshot 2024-07-04 at 12.27.56.png>)

Reviewer: ````suggestion
## Creating the Video Player Page

Update your `services/index.ts` file to add new functions that will fetch a video by its ID and update the `videos` collection to increment the video's views field.

```ts
// your other imports
import { readItems, readItem, updateItem } from "@directus/sdk";

export async function getVideo(id: string): Promise<Video> {
  const directus = getDirectusClient();
  const response = await directus.request(
    readItem("videos", id, {
      fields: ["*", "thumbnail.*", "video_file.*"],
    })
  );
  return response as Video;
}

export async function incrementViews(id: string) {
  const directus = getDirectusClient();
  const video = await directus.request(readItem("videos", id));
  await directus.request(
    updateItem("videos", id, { views: parseInt(video.views || 0) + 1 })
  );
}
```

Create a nested route in your **routes** folder in the format `video/[id]/+page.svelte` to create a page to play selected videos. Update this file with the following code:

```svelte
<script lang="ts">
  import { page } from "$app/stores";
  import { getVideo, incrementViews } from "$lib/services";
  import VideoPlayer from "svelte-video-player";
  import type { Video } from "$lib/types";

  let video: Video | null = null;

  $: id = $page.params.id;
  $: if (id) {
    getVideo(id)
      .then((v: Video) => {
        video = v;
        incrementViews(id);
      })
      .catch((error) => {
        console.error("Error fetching video:", error);
      });
  }
</script>

{#if video}
  <h1>{video.title}</h1>
  <p>
    {video.views} views • {new Date(video.upload_date).toLocaleDateString()}
  </p>
  <VideoPlayer
    poster={`${import.meta.env.VITE_DIRECTUS_URL}/assets/${video.thumbnail.id}`}
    source={`${import.meta.env.VITE_DIRECTUS_URL}/assets/${video.video_file.id}`}
  />
  <h2>Description</h2>
  <p>{video.description}</p>
  <h2>Tags</h2>
  <div class="tags">
    {#each video.tags as tag}
      <span class="tag">{tag}</span>
    {/each}
  </div>
{:else}
  <p>Loading...</p>
{/if}

<style>
  .tags { display: flex; flex-wrap: wrap; gap: 0.5rem; }
  .tag { background-color: #eee; padding: 0.25rem 0.5rem; border-radius: 0.25rem; }
</style>
```
Now click on any of the videos to stream it. 

![Video Player](<Screenshot 2024-07-04 at 12.27.56.png>)
````

Sorry to be annoying but can you double check the syntax in the `video/[id]/+page.svelte` `<script>`. I'm not a huge Svelte user, but looks a bit funky so a double check is always best.

Author: The syntax is correct for a Svelte application :)

## Search Functionality
In your `services/index.ts`, add a new funtion that implements search functionality to find videos by title or description.

```ts
+
export async function searchVideos(query: string): Promise<Video[]> {
  const directus = getDirectusClient();
  const response = await directus.request(
    readItems("videos", {
      search: query,
      fields: ["*", "thumbnail.*", "video_file.*"],
    })
  );
  return response as Video[];
}
```
This function uses the `search` parameter from Directus to perform a search on `videos` collection.

Update the code in your `routes/+page.svelte` file to use the `searchVideos` function to add search functionality to your page.

```svelte
+
<script lang="ts">
  import { onMount } from "svelte";
  import { getVideos, searchVideos } from "$lib/services/index";
  import VideoGrid from "$lib/components/VideoGrid.svelte";
  import type { Video } from "$lib/types";

  let videos: Video[] = [];
  let searchQuery = "";
  let searchResults: Video[] = [];
  let isSearching = false;

> 
>   onMount(async () => {
>     await loadLatestVideos();
>   });
> 
>   async function loadLatestVideos() {
>     try {
>       videos = (await getVideos({
>         sort: ["-upload_date"],
>         limit: 20,
>         fields: ["*", "thumbnail.*", "video_file.*"],
>       })) as Video[];
>     } catch (error) {
>       console.error("Error fetching videos:", error);
>     }
>   }
> 
>   async function handleSearch() {
>     if (searchQuery.trim()) {
>       isSearching = true;
>       try {
>         const response = await searchVideos(searchQuery);
>         searchResults = response as Video[];
>       } catch (error) {
>         console.error("Error searching videos:", error);
>       } finally {
>         isSearching = false;
>       }
>     } else {
>       searchResults = [];
>     }
>   }
> </script>
> 
> <h1>Stream your favourite vidoes</h1>
> 
> <form on:submit|preventDefault={handleSearch}>
>   <input type="text" bind:value={searchQuery} placeholder="Search for videos" />
>   <button type="submit">Search</button>
> </form>
> 
> {#if isSearching}
>   <p>Searching...</p>
> {:else if searchResults.length > 0}
>   <h2>Search Results</h2>
>   <VideoGrid videos={searchResults} />
> {:else if searchQuery}
>   <p>No results found.</p>
> {:else}
>   <h2>Latest Videos</h2>
>   {#if videos.length > 0}
>     <VideoGrid {videos} />
>   {:else}
>     <p>Loading videos...</p>
>   {/if}
> {/if}
> ```
> 
> You can now search and stream any video of your choice.
> ![Search videos](<Screenshot 2024-07-04 at 12.48.17.png>)

Reviewer: ````suggestion
## Implementing Search

In your `services/index.ts`, add a new funtion that implements search functionality to find videos by title or description.

```ts
export async function searchVideos(query: string): Promise<Video[]> {
  const directus = getDirectusClient();
  const response = await directus.request(
    readItems("videos", {
      search: query,
      fields: ["*", "thumbnail.*", "video_file.*"],
    })
  );
  return response as Video[];
}
```

This function uses the `search` parameter from Directus to perform a search on `videos` collection.

Update the code in your `routes/+page.svelte` file to use the `searchVideos` function to add search functionality to your page.

```svelte
<script lang="ts">
  import { onMount } from "svelte";
  import { getVideos, searchVideos } from "$lib/services/index";
  import VideoGrid from "$lib/components/VideoGrid.svelte";
  import type { Video } from "$lib/types";

  let videos: Video[] = [];
  let searchQuery = "";
  let searchResults: Video[] = [];
  let isSearching = false;

  onMount(async () => {
    await loadLatestVideos();
  });

  async function loadLatestVideos() {
    try {
      videos = (await getVideos({
        sort: ["-upload_date"],
        limit: 20,
        fields: ["*", "thumbnail.*", "video_file.*"],
      })) as Video[];
    } catch (error) {
      console.error("Error fetching videos:", error);
    }
  }

  async function handleSearch() {
    if (searchQuery.trim()) {
      isSearching = true;
      try {
        const response = await searchVideos(searchQuery);
        searchResults = response as Video[];
      } catch (error) {
        console.error("Error searching videos:", error);
      } finally {
        isSearching = false;
      }
    } else {
      searchResults = [];
    }
  }
</script>

<h1>Stream your favorite videos</h1>

<form on:submit|preventDefault={handleSearch}>
  <input type="text" bind:value={searchQuery} placeholder="Search for videos" />
  <button type="submit">Search</button>
</form>

{#if isSearching}
  <p>Searching...</p>
{:else if searchResults.length > 0}
  <h2>Search Results</h2>
  <VideoGrid videos={searchResults} />
{:else if searchQuery}
  <p>No results found.</p>
{:else}
  <h2>Latest Videos</h2>
  {#if videos.length > 0}
    <VideoGrid {videos} />
  {:else}
    <p>Loading videos...</p>
  {/if}
{/if}
```

You can now search and stream any video of your choice.
![Search videos](<Screenshot 2024-07-04 at 12.48.17.png>)
````

Please use the `// [!code ++]` at the end of any line you want to add a + diff to in the rendered post.

Author: Done

## Summary

> In this tutorial, you've learned how to build a Sveltekit video streaming application that uses data from a Directus project. You started by creating a new project, set up environment variables and everything you need to call Directus. You then created a videos collections in Directus and integrated them with the your Sveltekit project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this tutorial, you've learned how to build a SvelteKit video streaming application that uses data from a Directus project, tracking views when rendering data into pages.
```
